Will democracy prevail in Asia in 2025?
There are some worrying signs
2024-11-20
Read the original version of this article at The Economist
Fans of democracy breathed a sigh of relief in June 2024, when India’s electorate returned Narendra Modi, the prime minister, to government with a weakened mandate. Mr Modi had been gunning for a landslide win for his third term, boasting beforehand of how his party would win 400 of the 543 seats, giving him free rein to ram through legislation. But his Bharatiya Janata Party (bjp) managed to garner only 240 seats, which has forced Mr Modi to govern in a coalition, tempering his Hindu-nationalist agenda and some of his strongman instincts.
Then in August, widespread protests led to the ousting of Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh’s prime minister, who had become increasingly autocratic. Both events seemed good omens for the struggle between democracy and autocracy in Asia. Is such optimism likely to spread in 2025?
Take India first. Asia’s biggest democracy appears to be flourishing—up to a point. On the face of it, Mr Modi is acting as if little has changed since his humbling at the polls: his rhetoric still combines Hindu nationalism with an emphasis on development. His cabinet has not changed much since the election. But the opposition has been emboldened and civil society has become more confident, meaning that Mr Modi has had to make a series of u-turns on issues such as Muslim charities and a controversial broadcasting bill.
The Supreme Court has also blocked bjp-run states from introducing measures that could have been used to target Muslims. More about-turns are likely in 2025, not least as Mr Modi faces increasing criticism from the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (rss), a Hindu-nationalist organisation linked to the bjp. A round of state elections recently went better than anticipated (the party unexpectedly won in the state of Haryana), but suggested that Mr Modi is less of a vote-winner. In Haryana, for example, local issues predominated.
In the rest of South Asia, the messy business of building democratic institutions will continue. In Bangladesh, the process of establishing a stable society after the exit of Sheikh Hasina will carry on under Muhammad Yunus, an economist and microcredit pioneer, who was appointed leader of the interim government. Tensions will remain with India, where Sheikh Hasina fled; in October Bangladesh issued a warrant for her arrest. Their strained relations have been stoked by reports that members of the Hindu minority have been attacked in Bangladesh, and by its government’s decision to remove the physical inspection of any imports from Pakistan, raising fears that illegal arms could be shipped into the country.
In Sri Lanka, where the new president, Anura Kumara Dissanayake, hails from a party that started as a revolutionary Marxist-Leninist movement, the next few years are likely to be rocky. Mr Dissanayake (known as akd) is no Marxist zealot, has toned down the rhetoric of his party and has pushed the need for market reforms. But he is untested in power, having served only as agriculture minister 20 years ago. He will probably lead an unstable coalition that needs to undertake painful economic reforms.
Thus it is in South-East Asia where the most worrying examples of anti-democratic politics seem likely to emerge—in particular in Indonesia, where Prabowo Subianto was sworn in as president on October 20th. Mr Prabowo, the defence minister under Joko Widodo (known as Jokowi), his predecessor, was a general, and has been accused of atrocities in the former territory of East Timor (he denies the allegations).
Mr Prabowo started off his presidency with an eccentric initiation ritual: members of his bloated cabinet (with over 100 people, it is the largest since democracy returned in 1998) were summoned to a boot camp at Mr Prabowo’s alma mater, the military academy, five days after he was sworn in as president. More worryingly Tom Lembong, a high-profile opposition politician, was arrested soon after that. Prosecutors insist that the charges against him are not politically motivated, but it still looked like a signal to the president’s opponents. But it is not just the fact that Mr Prabowo may have more authoritarian instincts that makes his recent elevation to the presidency worrying. It is also because he is likely to be overshadowed by Jokowi, who came to power in 2014 promising to oppose the dynastic politics of old. Yet Jokowi’s son is now Mr Prabowo’s vice-president, and institutions have been weakened under Jokowi’s rule.
The situation looks grim, too, in Thailand. In August, Pita Limjaroenrat and his Move Forward Party, which won a plurality of seats in the election of 2023, were banned by the constitutional court. Mr Pita and other party leaders were barred from participating in politics for a decade. The court argued that Move Forward’s plans to reform the country’s harsh lèse-majesté law were a threat to Thailand’s monarchy. Many of the protesters who took to the streets in 2020, when Move Forward’s predecessor party was dissolved, are still in jail. Even if further protests take place, the lack of democratic accountability is clear.
And in Myanmar, where a military junta took over in a coup in 2021, hopes for a democratic breakthrough by rebel forces fighting the army look dimmer than ever. The junta will probably not fall. But the armed rebel groups that are gaining ground are unlikely to support democratic rule, and they continue to be supported by China. It is a damning indictment of democracy’s plight in Asia in 2025.